New exceptions section, recommended modern use (#81)
hsf-training/cpluspluscourse: talk/morelanguage/exceptions.tex

  \frametitlecpp[98]{Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{The concept}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item to handle \textit{exceptional} events that cannot be foreseen

>       \item to cleanly jump to the place where the error can be handled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item to cleanly jump to a place where the error can be handled
```
I like to propose this small distinction, because in many cases, we don't know where an error will be handled.

Author: I'm not convinced - although it's a minor point the programmer should know where the exception is going to be caught as part of the code design (and the compiler definitely knows 😄)

Reviewer: Not really. When I throw in my library, I have no clue which other library/application includes me as a third-party dependency and whether they can handle that. I can just document and hope for the best.
Do you know what exceptions or whether `boost::filesystem::exists()` can throw?  Do the authors of Boost.Filesystem now whether your code will catch or not, or what types it tries to catch? Sadly, not everybody inherits from `std::exception` too. We live in a world where software is build from many dependencies that we don't control. They could throw anything (even int or std::string).

And certainly the compiler does not know in many cases, e.g. if you load a shared object that you pulled form the internet or that was part of a commercial/closed-source software.

Author: There is documentation, but anyway, this is a minor issue so I changed it.

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{block}{In practice}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item add an exception handling block with {\it try ... catch}
>       \item throw an exception within it using {\it throw}

Reviewer 2: Actually, don't throw in that block, as Bernhard said. So maybe:
```suggestion
      \item add an exception handling block with {\it try ... catch} when exceptions are expected
      \item throw an exception using {\it throw} when a function cannot proceed with the intended task
```

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize}
    #include <stdexcept>
    ...
    try {
      if (0 == divisor) {
        throw illegal_argument("Cannot divide by zero");
      }
      ... // Normal processing
    } catch (const invalid_argument& e) {
      cerr << e.what() << endl;

>     }

Reviewer: I would be alarmed if a try/catch contained its own throw statement in the same function. This should be handled with normal control flow constructs instead. Could you try to phrase the example in a way that the try/catch and throw are in different functions?

Author: Fair enough - it was a rework of the original example, not enough I accept!

  \end{cppcode*}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[98]{Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{Rules and Advice}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item any object can be thrown, but best to use those in \texttt{stdexcept}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item define your own subclass of \texttt{std::exception} if needed
      \end{itemize}

>       \item exceptions will be caught if the object type of \textit{catch} matches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item exceptions will be caught if the object type in the \textit{catch clause} matches
```
Otherwise I wonder what `catch` refers to?

      \begin{itemize}
          \item if nothing catches an exception then \texttt{std::terminate} is called
          \item throw exceptions by value, catch them by (const) reference
      \end{itemize}

>       \item all objects on the stack between the \textit{throw} and the \textit{catch} have their destructors called

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      \item all objects on the stack between the \textit{throw} and the \textit{catch} are destructed automatically
```

      \begin{itemize}
        \item this should give you a clean release of intermediate resources
        \item make sure you are using the RAII idiom in your own classes
      \end{itemize}

>       \item use exceptions for runtime errors like bad inputs, file not found, DB connection, \ldots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item use exceptions for unlikely runtime errors like bad inputs, file not found, DB connection, \ldots
```
You could still check whether a config file is present or not and a "file not found" could be part of your normal business logic. I would recommend a check for file existence there instead of catching an exception. Exceptions should not be part of any normal business logic.

Author: I am thinking more of cases that crop up in HEP where the files *should* be there, e.g., they are registered in the file catalogue of the experiment. Thus not being able to access them is indeed *exceptional* (like the mass storage system is down). I added "unexpectedly" at least.

If you can think of better examples please suggest them!

>       \item \textit{don't} use exceptions for logic errors in your code (use \texttt{assert})

Reviewer 2: `assert` are useless in release builds, so you either get wrong results or a crash.
And I think there's logic errors that would deserve some kind of clean termination. At least an exception has a `what()` message that you could inspect.
You can also print an error message and `abort`, so I think we should find some general advice we can give to users.

Author: So a logic error means that you made a programming mistake so this is, by definiton, unrecovereable - the program needs fixed. All an exception does here is beautify things. It's also doubtful here that `e.what()` can tell you anything useful and you now lost the stack that could have been useful (I think even if you re-throw you lost some context?).

I still think `assert()` is the useful way to test all of the possible outcomes, although it's sometimes hard to anticipate all cases, that's true...

Reviewer 2: With `consider assert and tests`, you went in the right direction. I wanted to prevent people from writing `assert(false)`, which I have seen too often, but that's off the table now! 👍

      \item \textit{try ... catch} statements can also be nested
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      try {
        for (const &file : files) {
          try {
            process_file(file);
          }
          catch (const file_bad &e) {
            ... // Skips one file
          }
        }
      } catch (const db_bad &e) {
        ... // This exception
            // aborts everything
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
    \columnbreak
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      int process_file(const fileobj file) {
        if (fh = open_file(file)) {
          throw
            file_bad(file.error.reason());
        }
        while (!fh) {
          line = read_line(fh);
          add_line_to_db(line); // Can throw
                                // db_bad
        }
        return 0;
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[98]{Error Handling and Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item exceptions have little cost if no exception is thrown
      \begin{itemize}

>         \item a throw usually costs about as much as a function call

Reviewer: That depends on a lot of factors. I cannot find the paper on performance of various kind of error handling, but I remember exceptions where crazy expensive if you throw from a deeper call hierarchy or if you throw polymorphic values. But I cannot request you to change your wording until I find the numbers :/

Reviewer 2: Throw might require you to unwind of stuff and tear it down properly. The statement about the low cost when they are rare likely holds, though.
Just don't abuse them to pass information around.

Author: Based on : https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/errors-and-exception-handling-modern-cpp?view=msvc-170#exceptions-and-performance - could be compiler specific of course. I found a few stack overflow articles claiming the same, that the cost is throwing the exception, not the try ... catch. Throwing unwinds the stack, but that would be just as expensive when passed up through error values as done with an exception (and then also far more fragile).

Author: Rephrased this to be a bit clearer that the throw is ~like an *extra* call and that the stack always needs to be unwound

        \item so minimal if you are using exceptions for \textit{exceptional} events
        \item thus their use is generally recommended
      \end{itemize}

>       \item however, in a tight, performance critical loop, where the error is handled close to the place it happens a C-style error code might be better

Reviewer: I would not recommend solely a C-style error code. We have `boost::outcome`, `std::expected`, `std::system_error` or just a plain sentinal value (e.g. returning -1 if the normal return values are expected to be positive). Also C-style error code could imply `errno` here, which is a `thread_local` variable and that is also expensive.

Reviewer: @graeme-a-stewart Maybe you missed this comment.

Author: Fair point - now I say more explicitly "error code or object". I am a bit reluctant to get into the details of all the options in this slide (after all, it's the "exception" to exceptions, 😄).
- `boost::outcome` is out of scope for a core C++ course (Boost isn't really mentioned at all)
- `std::expected` didn't make it to C++20 AFAICS
- `std::system_error` is a lot heavier than an `int` (this is a tight loop, by definition)

>       \item however, in a tight, performance critical loop, where the error is handled close to the place it happens a C-style error code might be better

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      \item however, in a tight, performance-critical loop, where the error is handled close to the place it happens a C-style error code might be better
```

Author: I tried to be a bit more precise re. the cost and that stack unwind happens always - I hope we got the message across that you don't abuse exceptions in C++ as normal controlflow (don't use EAFP, unlike Python).

      \begin{itemize}
        \item But profile if you really want to find out!
      \end{itemize}
   \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // try ... catch in hot loop
      //   might impact performance
      for (const &item: list) {
        try {
          check_item(item); // Can throw bad_item
          ... // process item
        }
        catch (bad_item &e) {
          ... // ignore this item, but keep going
        }
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
    \columnbreak
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // For this code logic C-style error codes
      //   may be better
      for (const &item: list) {
        auto err_code = check_item(item);
        if (!err_code) {
          ... // process item
        } else {
          ... // warn and carry on
        }
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{noexcept}
  \begin{block}{noexcept}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item specifying the \textit{noexcept} operator states that a function is guaranteed not to throw an exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item specifying the \textit{noexcept} specifier states that a function is guaranteed not to throw an exception
```
The `noexcept` operator (written the same way) is used to query that property from a function, like `bool b = noexcept(f(2, 54));`

Author: Yep, honestly I'd say this is rather an advanced topic (I was indeed confused). I have tried to simplify this to essentials that are useful now.

      \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
        int f() noexcept;
      \end{cppcode*}
      \begin{itemize}

>         \item either no exceptions will ever be thrown or any they are handled internally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        \item either no exceptions will ever be thrown or they are handled internally
```
or
```suggestion
        \item no exceptions will ever escape from the function
```

>         \item checked at compile time, so it allows the compiler to optimise around that knowledge

Reviewer: Or pessimize. If you call a not noexcept function inside a noexcept function, the compiler needs to generate a try/catch block with a call to terminate. That is slower than if all functions had no noexcept specifier.

Therefore: noexcept should only appear on leaf functions.

Author: Yes, good suggestion - I have changed the advice generally to suggest this for leaf functions

      \end{itemize}

>       \item \textit{noexcept(expression)} evaluates the expression and, if \textit{true} the function won't throw

Reviewer: That is confusing:
`bool b = noexcept(expression)` does NOT evaluate the expression. In fact, it is an evaluated context.
`void f() noexcept(expression)` DOES evaluate the expression.
You can also combine them: `void f() noexcept(noexcept(expression))` which does NOT evaluate expression.
Please make a better distinction whether you are talking about the noexcept operator or specifier.

Author: Ditto for comment above.

        \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
          int safe_if_long_is_8_bytes() noexcept(sizeof(long)==8);
        \end{cppcode*}
      \item These uses can be nested, e.g.,
        \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
          int ok_if_f_and_g_ok() noexcept(noexcept(f()) && noexcept(g()));
        \end{cppcode*}

>       \item If you do use \textit{noexcept}, pay attention to destructors and don't allow exceptions to escape (or ever let resources leak)

Reviewer: Hmm. Destructors are implicitely marked `noexcept`, so why the special attention to them? You cannot even implement a throwing destructor (it will `std::terminate`) unless you explicitly mark it as `noexcept(false)`. Did it once in my life, caused a lot of troubles. Don't do it.

  \frametitlecpp[98]{Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{The concept}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item to handle \textit{exceptional} events that cannot be foreseen
      \item to cleanly jump to a place where the error can be handled
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{block}{In practice}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item add an exception handling block with {\it try ... catch} when exceptions are possible

Author: It's a good point - at the risk of being wordy I added "...and can be handled"

      \item throw an exception using {\it throw} when a function cannot proceed (or recover internally)
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      #include <stdexcept>
      ...
      try {
        process_stream_data(s);
      } catch (const range_error& e) {
        cerr << e.what() << endl;
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
    \columnbreak
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      process_stream_data(stream &s) {
        ...
        if (data_location >= buffer.length()) {

>           raise range_error("buf overflow");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          throw range_error("buf overflow");
```

        }
        ...
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[98]{Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{Rules and Advice}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item any object can be thrown; best to use those in \texttt{stdexcept}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item define your own subclass of \texttt{std::exception} if needed
      \end{itemize}
      \item exceptions will be caught if the object type in the \textit{catch} clause matches
      \begin{itemize}
          \item if nothing catches an exception then \texttt{std::terminate} is called
          \item throw exceptions by value, catch them by (const) reference
      \end{itemize}

>       \item all objects on the stack between the \textit{throw} and the \textit{catch} are destructed automatically

Reviewer: Should we mention that this is called `stack unwinding`?

      \begin{itemize}
        \item this should give you a clean release of intermediate resources
        \item make sure you are using the RAII idiom in your own classes
      \end{itemize}
      \item use exceptions for \textit{unlikely} runtime errors outside the program's control (bad inputs, files unexpectedly not found, DB connection, \ldots)

>       \item \textit{don't} use exceptions for logic errors in your code (consider \texttt{assert} and tests)

Reviewer: Maybe add:
don't use exceptions to provide no or an alternative return value. Use `std::optional`, `std::variant` or `boost::outcome` (or `std::expected` in C++23)`

Reviewer 3: Is it actually ok to suggest returning a custom struct/pair of outval,error_code as an alternative as well (and also mention it is not preferred to manipulate global errno like C)

Author: I split this slide in two now to make it more complete on these points (it's a bit wordy, but a lot more informative)

Author: It would seem that `std::optional` and `std::variant` are better than the older `std::pair` formalism, right?

        \item so minimal if you are using exceptions for \textit{exceptional} events
        \item thus their use is generally recommended
      \end{itemize}
      \item however, in a tight, performance-critical loop, where the error is handled close to the place it happens a C-style error code might be better
      \begin{itemize}
        \item But profile if you really want to find out!
      \end{itemize}
   \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // try ... catch in hot loop
      //   might impact performance
      for (const &item: list) {
        try {
          check_item(item); // Can throw bad_item
          ... // process item
        }
        catch (bad_item &e) {
          ... // ignore this item, but keep going
        }
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
    \columnbreak
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // For this code logic C-style error codes
      //   may be better
      for (const &item: list) {
        auto err_code = check_item(item);
        if (!err_code) {
          ... // process item
        } else {
          ... // warn and carry on

>         }

Reviewer: I think this is a good example for `std::optional<T>` if you don't care about the error code. Otherwise `boost::result<T>` or `std::expected`.

      }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{noexcept}
  \begin{block}{noexcept}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item specifying the \textit{noexcept} specifier states that a function is guaranteed throw an exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item specifying the \textit{noexcept} specifier states that a function is guaranteed to not throw an exception
```

      \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
        int f() noexcept;
      \end{cppcode*}
      \begin{itemize}
        \item either no exceptions will be thrown or they are handled internally
        \item checked at compile time, so it allows the compiler to optimise around that knowledge
      \end{itemize}
      \item \textit{noexcept(expression)} specifier evaluates the expression and, if \textit{true}, the function won't throw
        \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
          int safe_if_long_is_8_bytes() noexcept(sizeof(long)==8);
        \end{cppcode*}
      \item Use \textit{noexcept} on leaf functions where you can be sure of the behaviour

>       \item Note that since C++11 destructors are \textit{noexcept} - never try and throw from them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Note that since C++11 destructors are \textit{noexcept} - never throw from them
```
I missinterpreted your sentence as: I should not use a `try` block in a dtor, which you can use.

      \item \textit{try ... catch} statements can also be nested
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      try {
        for (const &file : files) {
          try {
            process_file(file);
          }
          catch (const file_bad &e) {
            ... // Skips one file
          }
        }
      } catch (const db_bad &e) {
        ... // This exception
            // aborts everything
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
    \columnbreak
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2}
      int process_file(const fileobj file) {
        if (fh = open_file(file)) {
          throw
            file_bad(file.error.reason());
        }
        while (!fh) {
          line = read_line(fh);
          add_line_to_db(line); // Can throw
                                // db_bad
        }
        return 0;
      }
    \end{cppcode*}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[98]{Error Handling and Exceptions}
  \begin{block}{}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item exceptions have little cost if no exception is thrown
      \begin{itemize}

>         \item a throw itself typically costs about as much as a function call (the stack needs to be unwound, but needs to be done for other error handling styles too)
>         \item so minimal if you are using exceptions for \textit{exceptional} events
>         \item thus their use is generally recommended

Reviewer 2: I would like to shorten this to create space for my next two comments below:
```suggestion
        \item so they are recommended for \textit{exceptional} events
```

      \end{itemize}
      \item however, in a tight, performance-critical loop, where the error is handled close to the place it happens a more explicit error code or object might be better
      \begin{itemize}
        \item but profile if you really want to find out!
      \end{itemize}
   \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{multicols}{2}
    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // try ... catch in hot loop
      //   might impact performance
      for (const &item: list) {
        try {
          check_item(item); // Can throw bad_item
          ... // process item
        }
        catch (bad_item &e) {
          ... // ignore this item, but keep going
        }
      }
    \end{cppcode*}

>     \columnbreak

Reviewer 2: I would like to see this in an `\begin{alertblock}{Don't}` (the red box) for discouraged things.

    \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\tiny,gobble=2}
      // For this code, explicit error codes
      //   may be better
      for (const &item: list) {
        std::optional<T> err_code = check_item(item);
        if (!err_code) {
          ... // process item
        } else {
          ... // warn and carry on
        }
      }

>     \end{cppcode*}

Reviewer 2: and this would go into `\begin{exampleblock}{Do}` for recommended things.

            std::optional<T> err_code = check_item(item);
            if (!err_code) {
              ... // process item
            } else {
              ... // warn and carry on
            }
          }
        \end{cppcode*}
      \end{exampleblock}
    \end{minipage}
  \end{multicols}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{Full power of noexcept}
  \begin{block}{3 uses of noexcept}
  \frametitlecpp[11]{noexcept}
  \begin{block}{noexcept}
    \begin{itemize}
    \item standalone
      \begin{cppcode*}{gobble=2, linenos=false}
      \item specifying the \textit{noexcept} specifier states that a function is guaranteed to not throw an exception
      \begin{cppcode*}{fontsize=\scriptsize,gobble=2,linenos=false}
        int f() noexcept;
      \end{cppcode*}
    \item as an expression saying whether exceptions can be sent
      \begin{cppcode*}{gobble=2, linenos=false}
        int f() noexcept(sizeof(long) == 8);
      \end{cppcode*}
    \item as an operator to know whether a function launches exceptions
      \begin{cppcode*}{gobble=2, linenos=false}
        constexpr bool callCannotThrow = noexcept(f());
        if constexpr (callCannotThrow) { ... }

>       \end{cppcode*}

Reviewer 4: I believe this usage of noexcept returning a bool has been lost in the refactoring.

Author: Yep, it did get lost - I have added it back now
